Data Science defines a discipline that incorporates applying varying degrees of statistical analysis, data visualizations, programming, data mining, machine learning, and database engineering to solve complex data problems. In addition to the technical skills associated with programming and software use, there are several other skills a Data Scientist needs to effectively execute daily tasks. These skill sets fall into several categories and are dependent on organizational needs, user needs, personal interest or drive.

First is the creative process category. This is by far the most accessible and widely recognized aspect of Data Science. Organizations and individuals are drawn to how info graphics and data visualizations take formerly complex ideas and make them accessible. In order to accomplish the creation of compelling and thought provoking graphics, the Data Scientist must either be proficient in graphic design, or have a close alliance with a graphic designer. It should be noted that typically the more popular infographics and data visualizations have limitations based on space and audience. Even when keeping the end goal in mind, it is extremely challenging to create infographics and data visualizations that tell the whole story. (Data Without Borders, 2011) Other important components of the creative process category are storytelling and communication. Without being able to thoroughly explore a topic and convey that topic to the intended audience in an understandable way, the data will quickly and easily lose its meaning and potential impact.

The second category is the information seeking behavior category. In this category are investigative skills and domain knowledge. Similar to the skills an investigative journalist or exploratory researcher will use, the Data Scientist must thoroughly understand their topic and collaborate with subject area experts in an effort to produce accurate and convincing data reports. For example, if a Data Scientist is planning on creating data visualization on economics, s/he should be versed in econometrics and macroeconomics as well as having an economist evaluates their methods and outputs.

The third category is the user needs category. All reports or visualizations a Data Scientist produces will be consumed by either an exclusive audience or range of audiences. Keeping in mind their specific needs and developing an appropriate, logical user interface for the intended audience may well be the most vital task in preparing a data report that can effectively be ingested. Despite a rising tide of press about the subject between 2011 and 2012, Data Science is not a new term. The International Council for Science: Committee on Data for Science and Technology (International Council for Science : Committee on Data for Science and Technology, 2012) has been publishing the CODATA Data Science Journal (Data Science Journal, 2012) since April 2002 (Data Science Journal, 2002). Another early claimant to the term Data Science is William S. Cleveland (Cleveland W. S., 2012) who wrote Data Science: An Action Plan for Expanding the Technical Areas of the Field of Statistics which was published in Volume 69, No. 1, of the April 2001 edition of the International Statistical Review / Revue Internationale de Statistique (Cleveland, 2001).